Notes on interpreting caching headers within an accelerator
===========================================================

Overview
--------

An HTTP accelerator functions as an HTTP proxy, but is configured and
managed by the operator of the "origin server."  As such, it may relax
or violate the normal rules of HTTP caching:  it is logically part of
the application being proxied.

In particular, an accelerator may be configured to:

 - serve certain stale response entities without revalidation.

 - cache response entities which might normally be un-cacheable (e.g.,
   for authenticated requests).

 - use application-specific logic (e.g., the value of a particular
   cookie) to decide which cached response entity to serve.

When used as part of another applciation (e.g., as WSGI middleware),
an accelerator may be used to fetch some responses from origin servers
which are never directly returned to the client (e.g., expanding
XIncludes or other "page assembly" markup).  In such cases, the
accelerator may be configured to ignore some other requirements of the
RFC (such as setting 'Age' and 'Warning' headers).

An overview of caching in HTTP in the RFC is here:

http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec13.html

Header: 'Age'
-------------

This header is supposed to be replaced whenever serving a response
from cache.  Accelerators should be able to ignore this requirement,
since they are *not* caches from the perspective of their clients.

- see http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.6

Header: 'Authorization'
-----------------------

http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.8

The RFC says "When a shared cache (see section 13.7) receives a
request containing an Authorization field, it MUST NOT return the
corresponding response as a reply to any other request, unless one of
the following specific exceptions holds.."

Since the accelerator isn't really a cache as far as the user agent is
concerned, it might ignore this and treat the Authorization header as
an item to vary on.

Header: 'Cache-Control'
-----------------------

The 'Cache-Control' header may be present in both the request and the
response.  Because the accelerator is *not* a cache from the
perspective of the client, 'Cache-Control' headers in the request are
less interesting than those in the response.

 - Request directives of interest

  * 'no-cache'

    In development mode, this header might be of interest (to cause
    the accelerator to be bypassed when the developer presses
    shift-reload).

- Request directives of no interest

  * 'no-store' (we never cache request data)

  * 'max-age' (we aren't a cache to the client)

  * 'max-stale' (we aren't a cache to the client)

  * 'min-fresh' (we aren't a cache to the client)

  * 'no-transform' (we never transform anything)

  * 'only-if-cached' (we aren't a cache to the client)

  * cache extensions (we ignore them)

- Response directives of interest

  * 'public'

    The response may be cached freely, even if it might otherwise be
    considered uncacheable (e.g. if it's served up as a result of an
    authenticated request).

  * 'private'

    When no field-level restriction is attached, indicates that the
    response should not be shared with other users.  Field-level
    restrictions are tricky, and not covered here.

  * 'no-cache'

    When no field-level restriction is attached, indicates that the
    response should not be served without revalidation, even if fresh.
    Field-level restrictions are tricky, and not covered here.

  * 'no-store'

    The response must not be cached at all.  The accelerator might
    ignore this if configured to do so by an integrator.

  * 'max-age'

    If set by the origin server, this directive controls how long
    the response is considered "fresh".  It implies 'public', unless
    one of the other,  more restrictive directives is present.

  * 'must-revalidate'

    Stale responses must be revalidated before they are served.

  * 'proxy-revalidate'

    Stale responses must be revalidated before they are served (shared
    caches only; private caches can ignore this directive).

- Response directives of no interest

  * 'no-transform' (relevant only for downstream caches)

  * 's-maxage' (relevant only for downstream caches)

  * cache extensions (we don't care about them in general)

- see http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.9

Header: 'Date'
--------------

Because it is within the application, the accelerator might chose to
replace the 'Date' header on a cached response, in order to make it
apparently fresh to downstream caches.

- http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.18


Header: 'ETag'
--------------

The ETag header is a HTTP header whereby a HTTP server can indicate
the identify of a given entity variant or version. This identity can
then be used to validate if it still is current, or in case of Vary to
find which one of a known list of variants are valid for the current
user/request.

Either "strong" or "weak" (when prefixed by 'W/'), entity tags identify
a particular "version" of a resource.

- http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec3.html#sec3.11

- http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.19

The preferred behavior for an HTTP/1.1 origin server is to send both a
strong entity tag and a Last-Modified value.

ETags can be used for validation (to validate cached entries) or Vary
support, using If-None-Match to find the proper variant amongst a set
of cached entries.

To check freshness, a browser sends the ETag of a cached page as the
value of an If-None-Match header
(http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.26).  If
the page is stale, the server should send back a 200 status plus the
new payload.  If the page is not stale, the server should send back a
304 Not Modified and an empty payload. XXX If-Match??

None of this is always useful for acceleration of dynamic content,
because the applications we're attempting to accelerate are almost
never I/O bound.  Furthermore, often it's just exactly as expensive
for the server to regenerate the entire payload and return it as it is
to do the work to 304-respond to a "conditional get".

In general, an accelerator might just always pass requests that
contain an If-None-Match header (an ETag is the value) to the origin
server without consulting the cache.

Header: 'Expires'
-----------------

Some pre-HTTP/1.1 origin servers do not provide a 'Cache-Control: max-age'
directive, but do provide an 'Expires:' header.  In such cases, the
effective max-age can be computed by subtracting the 'Date' header value
from the 'Expires' header value.

- http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.21


Header: 'Vary'
--------------

The Vary field value indicates the set of request-header fields that
fully determines, while the response is fresh, whether a cache is
permitted to use the response to reply to a subsequent request without
revalidation. For uncacheable or stale responses, the Vary field value
advises the user agent about the criteria that were used to select the
representation

http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.44

A server SHOULD use the Vary header field to inform a cache of what
request-header fields were used to select among multiple
representations of a cacheable response subject to server-driven
negotiation. The set of header fields named by the Vary field value is
known as the "selecting" request-headers.  When the cache receives a
subsequent request whose Request-URI specifies one or more cache
entries including a Vary header field, the cache MUST NOT use such a
cache entry to construct a response to the new request unless all of
the selecting request-headers present in the new request match the
corresponding stored request-headers in the original request.

Values referred to in Vary response headers might be used to find a
resource in the cache that would otherwise need to be regenerated on
the origin server.

A poilcy's store method should compute a cache key based on Vary
header values.  When a request comes in, a *sequence* of entities
would be consulted during fetch, and one (or none) would be returned
by comparing each entity against request environment data.

A Vary header field-value of "*" always fails to match and subsequent
requests on that resource can only be properly interpreted by the
origin server.

Header: 'Last-Modified'
-----------------------

- http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.29

Header: 'If-Modified-Since'
---------------------------

Part of "validation" (related to If-None-Match).

Header: 'Range':
---------------

HTTP retrieval requests using conditional or unconditional GET methods
MAY request one or more sub-ranges of the entity, instead of the
entire entity, using the Range request header.

http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.35

A simple accelerator policy should probably pass requests with a Range
header along to the application and not attempt to cache the response.

Misc
----

Responses to https requests should only be stored if the person who
sets up the accelerator overrides some default "dont cache https
responses" policy.

Requests with a Cache-Control: max-age=0 should be treated like
"Pragma: no-cache" requests:
http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.9.4

We should never store the transfer-encoding response header (or any
other hop-by-hop) headers in a representation of an entity.  Scarecrow
hop-by-hop list (from httplib2): ['connection', 'keep-alive',
'proxy-authenticate', 'proxy-authorization', 'te', 'trailers',
'transfer-encoding', 'upgrade']

We should probably cache anything with a 2XX response code, and ignore
stuff with non-2XX responses. Except 206 (partial response).

Not sure what to do about Set-Cookie headers.  See
http://www.squid-cache.org/mail-archive/squid-dev/200101/0446.html .

Dogpiling (aka "thundering herd") solution from
http://psychicorigami.com/ :

"""
The standard way to use a cache is to do something like:

value = cache.get('key', None)
if value is None:
    value = recompute_cached_value()
    cache['key'] = value
return value

Now this is fine normally. When the cached value expires the next
request will simply call recompute_cached_value() and the cache will
be updated for future requests.

The trouble arises when recompute_cached_value() takes a long time to
run and you have have a lot of other requests running at the same
time. If a request is still recalculating the value and another
request comes along, then that will also attempt to recalculate the
value. This will in turn probably slow down the calculation going on,
making it more likely that the next request to arrive will also
trigger a recalculation and so on. Very quickly you can end up with
tens/hundreds/thousands of request all attempting to recalculate the
cached value and you have lost most of the advantage of caching in the
first place.

So to handle this situation more gracefully this caching decorator
employs a two stage expiry.

First there is a hard cut off expiry that works like normal. This is
set to occur later than the other expiry time and is the value that
would be fed to memcache or equivalent.

The second expiry time set is the one normally used. Basically when we
store/retrieve the cached data we also have access to this expiry time
(and the version). If we see that we need to recalculate the value
(due to the expiry time being in the past or the version being
different), then we attempt to grab a lock to recalculate the
value. If we don't grab the lock, we assume another thread is doing
the recalculation and rather than wait around we simply serve up the
old (stale) data. This should mean that one thread (potentially
per-process) will end up doing the recalculation rather than several.

This also means that we don't have to remove a value from the cache to
force a refresh (which might cause dogpiling). Instead we can update
whatever value we use in our version function, to trigger a graceful
refresh.
"""

Simplifying assumptions
-----------------------

- We never store responses or fetch cached entities for Range
  requests.

- We always pass conditional requests (requests with
  If-Modified-Since, If-Match, If-None-Match, etc.) through to the
  application without getting involved in revalidation ourselves.  We
  aren't interested in playing in any bandwidth-conservation schemes.


